# Counting from 98 to 14 in C++

This book is a (quite opinionated) overview of many features added in
the C++ language and the standard library since the huge major update
called C++11.

[Get the PDF here.](https://github.com/j-jorge/counting-in-cpp/releases/tag/continuous), or [read it online](https://julien.jorge.st/counting-in-cpp/).

My hope is that the reader will find here an intermediate view on the
language, between the cold factual description from the standard and
the various low level subtleties one can find on various forums and
blogs. So, if by reading this book you learn something about the
language or if you suddenly understand why some feature has been added
at some point, I will have completed my mission. Additionally, I will
sometimes complete a section with personnal or critical comments based
on my own experience.

The sections are quite short and suppose some basic knowledge of the
language (pre-11 knowledge is enough). The casual C++ programmer will
appreciate skimming through its content to get an overview the
available tools.

Please note that only C++11 is covered in the current state of this
document.

# Contributing

Writing is hard, and at some point sentences and words become a fog of
blurry shapes where I can't even see my own words. Sometimes also, the
mood is not there and the tone becomes harsh. If you find any typo or
badly formulated sentences, feel free to open a pull request.

Large contributions are a delicate topic. Since the book is full of my
personal opinion, and since my name is on the cover, I probably cannot
accept biased contributions unless I fully agree with their author. If
you want to address a topic, please do it in a neutral way.

Finally, if you want to add a section about a not yet discussed
feature, please do it. The idea is to present the features in a kind
of tangible way, preferably based on the experience of someone
actually using it in production code.

# License

The book is available under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International License.

Note that I don't require the transfer of copyright ownership on the
contributions, so a good way to keep this book forever free is simply
to contribute! (_wink_).

